DO_ID,SUMMARY
DOID:9119,"Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a group of neoplasms characterized by clonal expansion of myeloid blasts. It can present with fever, pallor, anemia, hemorrhages, and recurrent infections. AML may involve genetic abnormalities, such as mutations in the CEBPA gene, and can be associated with congenital disorders or genetic defects. Symptoms include anemia, thrombocytopenia, fatigue, bleeding, bruising, infections, bone pain, and extramedullary site involvement. AML is a rapidly progressing cancer affecting the blood and bone marrow, leading to abnormal cell growth that interferes with normal blood cell production. Symptoms may include fatigue, shortness of breath, easy bruising, bleeding, and increased infection risk. AML is typically fatal within weeks or months if left untreated."
DOID:0060318,"Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an aggressive form of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) characterized by a granulocytic differentiation block and a specific chromosomal translocation t(15;17) involving the RARA gene. This translocation leads to an accumulation of immature blood-forming cells (promyelocytes) in the bone marrow, resulting in a shortage of normal blood cells. Symptoms include easy bruising, hemorrhagic diathesis, fatigue, and an increased risk of bleeding and blood clot formation. APL is responsive to all-trans retinoic acid therapy, with improved survival rates compared to the past. It is most commonly diagnosed around age 40."
DOID:299,"Adenocarcinoma is a type of cancerous tumor that arises from glandular tissue and epithelial cells. It can occur in various parts of the body and is characterized by the presence of malignant glandular cells. Adenocarcinomas are classified based on growth patterns and secreting products, with examples including breast, lung, renal, liver, colon, and prostate adenocarcinomas. The term adenocarcinoma is often omitted in specific cancer names, such as invasive ductal carcinoma in breast cancer, but used to differentiate esophageal adenocarcinoma from esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The different types of adenocarcinoma vary greatly, making generalizations challenging."
DOID:10652,"Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that is the most common cause of dementia, affecting memory, thinking, and daily activities. It typically starts slowly and worsens over time, with symptoms including memory loss, confusion, language difficulties, and behavioral changes. The disease ultimately leads to a severe loss of mental function, with individuals becoming completely dependent on others for care. Alzheimer's can occur in midlife or later in adulthood, with no known cure to stop its progression. The risk of developing Alzheimer's increases with age and may be influenced by genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. While treatments can temporarily slow symptom worsening, the disease ultimately leads to death from complications like pneumonia or malnutrition."
DOID:0050894,"Ameloblastoma is a rare, benign tumor that develops in the jaw, typically near the molars. It originates from the cells that form tooth enamel and is more common in the lower jaw than the upper jaw. Symptoms include painless jaw swelling, tooth displacement, and root resorption. If left untreated, it can lead to facial disfigurement. Malignant transformation and metastasis are uncommon. The tumor was first recognized in 1827 and has been known by various names before being officially named ameloblastoma in 1930."
DOID:3069,"Malignant astrocytoma is a type of brain tumor that originates from star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes in the brain and spinal cord. It is the second most common glioma after glioblastomas and can occur in various parts of the brain, occasionally affecting the spinal cord. This type of tumor typically does not spread outside the central nervous system or affect other organs."
DOID:0060041,"Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that affects how a person interacts, communicates, and learns. It includes a range of symptoms such as communication difficulties, restricted interests, and repetitive behaviors. The causes of ASD are not fully understood but are believed to involve both genetic and environmental factors. Diagnosis involves a comprehensive evaluation by a team of specialists. Early intervention is crucial for better outcomes. Treatment options include behavior and communication therapies, skills training, and medications to manage symptoms. ASD varies in severity and can impact social, academic, and employment settings. People with ASD may have challenges in social skills, communication, and repetitive actions. The condition can be diagnosed at any age, but symptoms typically appear in early childhood. ASD is characterized by deficits in social interaction, communication, and restricted, repetitive behaviors. The disorder affects individuals differently, with a wide range of intellectual abilities and language skills. The term ""spectrum"" refers to the variability in symptoms and abilities among individuals with ASD. There is currently no cure for ASD, but therapies and interventions can help manage symptoms and improve functioning."
DOID:707,"B-cell lymphoma is a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma that arises from abnormal B-cells, white blood cells that produce antibodies. It can manifest as slow-growing with mild symptoms or aggressive with severe symptoms. Common signs include swollen lymph nodes, abdominal pain, fatigue, fever, night sweats, and weight loss. The cause of B-cell lymphoma is not fully understood but can be linked to genetic abnormalities, environmental factors, viruses, immunodeficiency states, and connective-tissue disorders. This type of lymphoma primarily affects older adults and immunocompromised individuals. Symptoms may include enlarged painless lymph nodes, fever, night sweats, unintended weight loss, itching, and fatigue. B-cell lymphoma is a form of blood cancer that develops in the lymph nodes and is characterized by the abnormal growth of B-cells."
DOID:11054,"Bladder cancer is a malignancy that originates in the tissues of the urinary bladder. It can present with multiple tumors at different times and sites in the bladder. The most common types are transitional cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma. Symptoms include blood in the urine, pain with urination, and low back pain. Risk factors include smoking, exposure to certain chemicals, family history, age, race, and gender. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biologic therapy. Bladder cancer occurs when abnormal cells in the bladder multiply uncontrollably to form a tumor. It may cause blood in the urine, pain during urination, frequent urination, the feeling of needing to urinate without being able to, or lower back pain. Bladder cancer can be categorized by the type of cell in the tissue that becomes cancerous, with the most common being transitional cell carcinoma. If the tumor spreads beyond the bladder lining, it is known as invasive bladder cancer. An urinary system cancer that results in malignant growth located in the urinary bladder."
DOID:4007,"Bladder cancer is a malignancy that originates in the tissues of the urinary bladder. It can present with multiple tumors at different times and sites in the bladder. The most common types are transitional cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma. Symptoms include blood in the urine, pain with urination, and low back pain. Risk factors include smoking, exposure to certain chemicals, family history, age, race, and gender. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biologic therapy. Bladder cancer occurs when abnormal cells in the bladder multiply uncontrollably to form a tumor. It may cause blood in the urine, pain during urination, frequent urination, the feeling of needing to urinate without being able to, or lower back pain. Bladder cancer can be categorized by the type of cell in the tissue that becomes cancerous, with the most common being transitional cell carcinoma. If the tumor spreads beyond the bladder lining, it is known as invasive bladder cancer. A urinary bladder cancer that has material basis in abnormally proliferating cells derives from epithelial cells."
DOID:1612,"Breast cancer is a histopathologically and genetically heterogeneous disease that originates from breast tissue cells. It can present with various symptoms such as lumps, changes in breast shape, and skin abnormalities. The most common type is invasive ductal carcinoma. Hereditary factors, including mutations in genes like BRCA1 and BRCA2, play a significant role in familial occurrences. Breast cancer can affect both men and women, with lobular cancer being rare in men. Early stages may not show noticeable symptoms, but as the cancer progresses, signs like nipple changes and skin irritation may appear. Metastasis to other parts of the body can occur. Treatment can lead to full recovery, and support services are available to help cope with the emotional impact of the diagnosis."
DOID:162,"Cancer is a disease of cellular proliferation that is malignant and primary, characterized by uncontrolled cellular proliferation, local cell invasion and metastasis."
DOID:1287,"Cardiovascular disease (CVD) encompasses a range of conditions affecting the heart and blood vessels, including coronary artery diseases, heart failure, hypertensive heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease, carditis, aortic aneurysms, peripheral artery disease, thromboembolic disease, and venous thrombosis. It involves anatomical entities in the blood, heart, blood vessels, or lymphatic system that transport nutrients, gases, hormones, blood cells, and lymph to maintain bodily functions and homeostasis."
DOID:1222,"Cartilage is a resilient and smooth connective tissue that covers bones at joints and provides structure to various body parts. It is not as hard as bone but stiffer than muscle. The matrix of cartilage consists of glycosaminoglycans, proteoglycans, collagen fibers, and sometimes elastin. Injuries, inflammation, or genetic factors can lead to cartilage problems, causing pain, limited movement, and joint damage. Osteoarthritis is a result of cartilage breakdown."
DOID:0060669,"Cerebral cavernous malformations are rare vascular anomalies in the central nervous system, distinct from arteriovenous malformations. They consist of enlarged blood vessels without neural tissue, causing symptoms like hemorrhagic stroke, seizures, and headaches. These malformations are venous and not visible on arteriography. CCM1 inheritance is autosomal dominant. Cavernous hemangiomas, also known as cavernomas, are characterized by abnormal blood vessels with thin walls, leading to blood leakage and hemorrhage. CCMs can be found in the brain or spinal cord, causing symptoms like paralysis, vision changes, and back pain. They can be inherited or sporadic, with some individuals remaining asymptomatic. Cerebral cavernomas are dilated capillaries lacking structural support, leading to potential cerebral hemorrhages and seizures."
DOID:4362,"Cervical cancer is a malignant neoplasm originating from dysplastic lesions at the cervix. It is strongly linked to human papillomavirus infection. Symptoms may include abnormal vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain. Risk factors include smoking, multiple childbirths, long-term birth control pill use, and HIV infection. Screening tests like Pap smears can detect abnormal cells early. Treatment options include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Vaccines can protect against HPV strains that cause cancer. Early detection through screening and vaccination can prevent the development of cervical cancer."
DOID:1040,"Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a common neoplasia of B lymphocytes that accumulates in bone marrow, blood, and lymphoid tissues. The disorder has a heterogeneous clinical evolution, with some patients having indolent disease and others aggressive disease with short survival. CLL is the most common form of leukemia in Western countries, affecting elderly adults with a slight male predominance. Symptoms can include swollen lymph nodes, fatigue, weight loss, fever, night sweats, and frequent infections. The clinical course varies greatly, with survival ranging from months to decades. CLL is a type of cancer where the bone marrow produces too many lymphocytes, leading to the accumulation of abnormal cells that interfere with the normal function of blood cells."
DOID:4467,"Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is a rare kidney tumor arising from proximal tubular epithelial cells of the renal cortex. Histologically, it is characterized by malignant epithelial cells with clear cytoplasm due to high glycogen and lipid content, showing a nested growth pattern. Clinically, it may present with symptoms like hematuria, flank pain, anemia, or a palpable abdominal mass. The cancer cells in clear cell renal cell carcinoma quickly multiply, forming a mass in the kidney. The exact cause is unknown, but factors like smoking, certain medications, and genetic conditions like von Hippel Lindau syndrome may contribute to its development. This type of cancer is also known as clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma (CCRCC) and is identified by cells that appear pale or clear under a microscope."
DOID:234,Colon adenocarcinoma is a carcinoma that originates from glandular epithelial cells.
DOID:219,"Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease common in both men and women, with lifestyle, environmental factors, and gene defects contributing to its development. It arises from the colon or rectum, with genetic alterations associated with progression from premalignant lesions to invasive adenocarcinoma. Risk factors include colon polyps, ulcerative colitis, and genetic family history. Symptoms may include blood in the stool, changes in bowel movements, weight loss, abdominal pain, and fatigue. Dietary factors, obesity, smoking, lack of physical activity, and inflammatory bowel disease are also linked to the disease. Colorectal cancer typically starts as a benign tumor, often in the form of a polyp, which can become cancerous over time. Screening tests can detect polyps early to prevent cancer development. Treatment options depend on the cancer stage, with surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy being common approaches. Germany offers high-quality medical care and support services for individuals with colorectal cancer."
DOID:9256,A large intestine cancer that is located_in the colon and/or located_in the rectum.
DOID:0080600,"COVID-19 is a contagious disease caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. The first case was identified in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. Scientists believe the virus entered human populations through natural zoonosis, similar to other outbreaks. Social and environmental factors like climate change and wildlife trade increased the likelihood of zoonotic spillover. The disease quickly spread worldwide, resulting in a pandemic. COVID-19 is characterized by fever, cough, and shortness of breath, spreading through droplets and small particles. Resources are available for symptoms, risks, testing, vaccines, and post-COVID conditions."
DOID:0050745,"Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, primarily affecting adults but also occurring rarely in adolescents and children. It is characterized by rapidly growing masses in nodal or extranodal sites like the thyroid, skin, breast, gastrointestinal tract, testes, bone, or brain. Symptoms may include fever, night sweats, and weight loss. DLBCL has an aggressive disease course, with elderly patients having a poorer prognosis than younger individuals. It is a fast-growing cancer of B cells, responsible for producing antibodies, and can manifest as a rapidly growing mass or tissue infiltration. DLBCL is associated with systemic B symptoms such as fever, weight loss, and night sweats."
DOID:684,"Hepatocellular carcinoma is a primary liver cancer derived from well-differentiated hepatocytes. It is the most common type of primary liver cancer in adults and is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Major risk factors include chronic hepatitis B or C infections, dietary aflatoxin exposure, alcoholic cirrhosis, and cirrhosis due to other causes. Symptoms may include a hepatic mass, abdominal pain, jaundice, cachexia, and liver failure. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or liver transplantation. Hepatoblastomas, a rare form of liver cancer, are thought to be derived from undifferentiated hepatocytes and most commonly occur in children under 3 years of age."
DOID:5041,"Esophageal cancer, specifically esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), is a common malignancy of the esophagus. Risk factors include environmental influences like smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, and acid reflux, as well as genetic predisposition. Symptoms may include difficulty swallowing, weight loss, hoarse voice, and coughing up blood. Diagnosis involves imaging tests and biopsies, with treatment options such as surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. High-risk areas like China show a familial aggregation of ESCC, suggesting a genetic component. Gastric cardia adenocarcinoma in China shares similarities with ESCC in terms of risk factors and distribution."
DOID:10534,"Gastric cancer is a malignant disease that originates in the stomach and can spread to nearby organs and lymph nodes. It can also metastasize to other parts of the body. The two main histologic types are diffuse and intestinal carcinomas. Symptoms include indigestion, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing, and weight loss. Genetic predisposition to gastric cancer is associated with various syndromes, including hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Risk factors include Helicobacter pylori infection, stomach inflammation, and a family history of the disease. Diagnosis is challenging in early stages, and treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation."
DOID:5517,"Gastric cancer is a malignant disease that originates in the stomach and can spread to nearby organs and lymph nodes. It can also metastasize to other parts of the body. The two main histologic types are diffuse and intestinal carcinomas. Symptoms include indigestion, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing, and weight loss. Genetic predisposition to gastric cancer is associated with various syndromes, including hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Risk factors include Helicobacter pylori infection, stomach inflammation, and a family history of the disease. Diagnosis is challenging in early stages, and treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation."
DOID:3068,"Glioblastoma is a malignant brain tumor that originates from astrocytes, a type of brain cell. These tumors are aggressive, growing into surrounding brain tissue and causing symptoms like headaches, nausea, and drowsiness. The exact cause is often unknown, but they can rarely occur in individuals with certain genetic syndromes. Glioblastoma, also known as glioblastoma multiforme, is the most aggressive and common type of brain cancer with a poor prognosis. Symptoms are nonspecific and may include headaches, personality changes, and stroke-like symptoms. It is characterized by necrotizing tissue surrounded by anaplastic cells and hyperplastic blood vessels."
DOID:3070,High grade glioma is a cancer that originates from glial cells and can be found in the brain or spine.
DOID:5520,"Squamous cell carcinoma, head and neck, is a rare tumor characterized by malignant epithelial neoplasms with squamous differentiation. It can arise in various locations within the head and neck region, presenting with symptoms like odynophagia, dysphagia, neck masses, voice changes, and more. Risk factors include tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption, and high-risk HPV infection. The tumors can spread locally or metastasize to lymph nodes, lungs, liver, and bones. Different subtypes exist, each with distinct clinical presentations and prognoses. Treatment and outcomes depend on the tumor's location, size, and lymph node involvement. Early detection and appropriate management are crucial for improving patient outcomes."
DOID:1883,"Hepatitis C is an infectious disease caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV) that primarily affects the liver. Symptoms can range from mild to severe, with initial infection often showing no symptoms. Chronic infection can lead to liver disease, cirrhosis, and serious complications like liver failure or cancer. The virus is transmitted through blood and body fluids, with confirmation of diagnosis involving detecting HCV RNA in the presence of positive anti-HCV in serum. Chronic hepatitis C increases the risks of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, contributing to higher mortality rates."
DOID:1168,"Familial hyperlipidemia is characterized by abnormally high levels of lipids in the blood, including fats, triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids. It encompasses both acquired and genetic disorders that lead to this condition. Familial hyperlipidemia is a subset of dyslipidemia and a superset of hypercholesterolemia, requiring ongoing medication for management."
DOID:10941,"Intracranial berry aneurysm, also known as cerebral aneurysm, is a cerebrovascular disorder characterized by weakness in the wall of a cerebral artery or vein, leading to a localized dilation or ballooning of the blood vessel. It typically presents as a rounded shape and is the most common form of cerebral aneurysm. An intracranial aneurysm with a characteristic rounded shape; the most common form of cerebral aneurysm."
DOID:5082,"Liver cirrhosis is a disease characterized by severe liver-cell swelling, Mallory body formation, pericellular fibrosis, and copper deposits. Symptoms include abdomen swelling, jaundice, and pulmonary hypertension. Cirrhosis results from scar tissue formation due to liver damage, leading to impaired liver function. Early symptoms may include tiredness, weakness, loss of appetite, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort. As the disease progresses, symptoms may include itchiness, leg swelling, abdominal fluid build-up, jaundice, easy bruising, and spider-like blood vessels on the skin. Complications can include hepatic encephalopathy, bleeding from dilated veins, and liver cancer. Cirrhosis can lead to easy bruising, abdominal or leg swelling, sensitivity to medicines, high blood pressure in liver veins, varices in the esophagus and stomach, kidney failure, jaundice, severe itching, and gallstones. Liver cancer can develop in some cases. The disease is diagnosed through blood tests, imaging, or biopsy. Common causes in the US are chronic alcoholism and hepatitis. Treatment focuses on managing the underlying cause to prevent worsening. Liver transplant may be necessary in severe cases. Liver cirrhosis is the end stage of liver fibrosis, leading to liver nodulation and portal hypertension. Symptoms vary depending on the disease stage, with some patients being asymptomatic and others experiencing hepatic function decline, portal hypertension, or detoxification issues."
DOID:3910,"Lung adenocarcinoma is a common type of lung cancer that arises from abnormal cell growth in the lungs. It is a subtype of non-small cell lung cancer, typically found in the outer lung area. Symptoms may include chest pain, coughing up blood, fatigue, and weight loss. This type of cancer is characterized by distinct cellular and molecular features and is classified separately from small cell lung cancer. Lung cancer susceptibility 3 is a protein encoded by the LNCR3 gene and is associated with this specific type of lung cancer."
DOID:1324,"Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer deaths globally and in the U.S. It has two main forms: non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer. NSCLC includes squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large cell lung cancer. Cigarette smoking is strongly linked to small cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinoma, while adenocarcinoma is common in non-smokers. Lung cancer can cause symptoms like chest pain, coughing, and weight loss. NSCLC is often diagnosed late and has a poor prognosis. Small cell lung cancer grows quickly and commonly spreads beyond the lung, with a low survival rate. NSCLC has a 5-year survival rate of 11-17%, varying by subtype and stage."
DOID:3905,"Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer deaths globally and in the U.S. It has two main forms: non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer. NSCLC includes squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large cell lung cancer. Cigarette smoking is strongly linked to small cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinoma, while adenocarcinoma is common in non-smokers. Lung cancer can cause symptoms like chest pain, coughing, and weight loss. NSCLC is often diagnosed late and has a poor prognosis. Small cell lung cancer grows quickly and commonly spreads beyond the lung, with a low survival rate. NSCLC has a 5-year survival rate of 11-17%, varying by subtype and stage. A lung cancer that has material basis in abnormally proliferating cells derives from epithelial cells and is located in the lungs and has_symptom cough and has symptom chest discomfort or pain and has symptom weight loss and has symptom hemoptysis."
DOID:3908,"Lung non-small cell carcinoma, also known as NSCLC, is a type of epithelial lung cancer that makes up about 85% of all lung cancers. NSCLC is less responsive to chemotherapy compared to small-cell lung cancer. The primary treatment approach for NSCLC involves surgical resection with curative intent, although chemotherapy is increasingly used before and after surgery."
DOID:7474,Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a cancer that originates from mesothelium cells.
DOID:1909,"Melanoma is a dangerous type of skin cancer that originates from melanocytes, the cells producing melanin. It commonly appears on the skin, with men often affected on the back and women on the legs. Melanoma can also occur in the mouth, intestines, or eye. The disease is characterized by changes in moles, with the ""ABCDE"" rule helping to identify warning signs. Treatment involves surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, biologic therapy, and targeted therapy. Melanoma can develop from existing moles or new growths, with irregular shapes and colors. It may spread if it thickens and involves multiple skin layers. Risk factors include a high number of moles, genetic syndromes, and previous melanoma diagnosis. Melanoma is diagnosed using markers like S-100 protein and HMB-45, with new antibodies like Mitf, Melan-A, and tyrosinase showing promise. Other types of skin cancer include basal cell cancer, squamous cell cancer, and melanoma, which is the most dangerous and can spread rapidly."
DOID:2377,"Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) that mainly affects young adults, particularly females. It is characterized by perivascular infiltration of monocytes and lymphocytes, leading to sclerosis in plaques. The autoimmune attack on the myelin sheath is mediated by both cellular and humoral immunity. Symptoms include visual loss, extra-ocular movement disorders, paresthesias, weakness, dysarthria, spasticity, ataxia, and bladder dysfunction. MS disrupts the transmission of signals in the nervous system, resulting in various physical, mental, and sometimes psychiatric problems. It can manifest in relapsing forms with intermittent symptoms or progressive forms with worsening disability over time. The immune system mistakenly attacks the myelin in the CNS, leading to nerve damage. MS can vary in severity, with some experiencing mild symptoms and others facing increasing disability. The disease is rarely fatal, and most individuals have a normal life expectancy. Symptoms can include sensory disturbances, muscle control issues, and vision problems. Different forms of MS include relapsing-remitting, secondary progressive, primary progressive, and progressive relapsing MS. Treatment focuses on symptom management and slowing disease progression through medications and therapy."
DOID:0050866,"Oral squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that arises from the oral cavity, affecting mainly adults in their fifth and sixth decades of life. It is linked to alcohol and tobacco use, with human papillomavirus present in about half of cases. The disease tends to metastasize early to lymph nodes. Patients may be asymptomatic when the tumor is small, but can later experience symptoms such as mucosal ulceration, pain, difficulty with speaking, chewing, and swallowing, bleeding, weight loss, and neck swelling. Prognostic factors include tumor size and lymph node status. Squamous-cell carcinoma, also known as epidermoid carcinoma, originates in squamous cells found on the skin, in hollow organs, and in the respiratory and digestive tracts."
DOID:8398,"Osteoarthritis is a degenerative joint disease affecting cartilage and bone, leading to joint pain and stiffness. It is a common condition, affecting hands, knees, hips, neck, and lower back. The disease progresses slowly over time, causing bone spurs and inflammation. While there is no cure, symptoms can be managed. Osteoarthritis primarily impacts older adults, but can occur earlier due to joint injuries or excess stress on joints. Symptoms include joint pain, stiffness, and reduced mobility, with severe cases affecting daily tasks and quality of life. OA is most common in the hands, hips, and knees, with cartilage breakdown and bone changes leading to pain, swelling, and disability over time."
DOID:11476,"Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disorder characterized by decreased bone mass, deterioration of bone microarchitecture, and increased fracture risk. It is often clinically silent until a fracture occurs, with common sites being the spine, forearm, wrist, and hip. The disease can lead to chronic pain and decreased mobility after a fracture. Osteoporosis is more common in women and older individuals, but there are ways to protect and strengthen bones, even in old age."
DOID:3347,"Osteosarcoma is a primary malignant bone tumor characterized by the direct formation of immature bone or osteoid tissue. It originates in bone-forming cells, typically affecting the ends of long bones. This type of bone cancer is the most common, with boys and girls having a similar incidence until late adolescence, when boys are more commonly affected. While it usually occurs in larger bones like the shin, thigh, and upper arm, it can develop in any bone. Various variants of osteosarcoma exist, including osteoblastic, chondroblastic, and fibroblastic types. The cause is unknown, but in some cases, it may run in families, with at least one gene associated with increased risk."
DOID:2394,"Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of death among gynecologic malignancies, often presenting at an advanced stage with vague symptoms. It arises from genetic alterations in the ovarian surface epithelium, with epithelial ovarian carcinoma being the most common form. Symptoms include bloating, pelvic pain, and abdominal swelling. Ovarian cancer can originate from the ovary, fallopian tubes, or peritoneum, with tumors often spreading to nearby organs. High levels of the tumor marker CA125 in the blood suggest ovarian cancer. Mutations in genes like BRCA1 and BRCA2 increase the risk of developing ovarian cancer. Treatment is most effective when the cancer is detected early, as late-stage diagnosis can make it challenging to treat."
DOID:1793,"Pancreatic cancer has a low survival rate, often diagnosed at an advanced stage with metastasis. Risk factors include family history, type 2 diabetes, and smoking. Familial pancreatic carcinoma involves two or more first-degree relatives with the disease. Symptoms are nonspecific, including abdominal pain, weight loss, and jaundice. The cancer arises from the pancreas, affecting both exocrine and endocrine cells. It is challenging to detect early due to vague symptoms and location. Treatments may include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy."
DOID:3498,Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma originates from pancreatic duct cells.
DOID:3969,Thyroid gland papillary carcinoma is a differentiated thyroid carcinoma with a small mushroom-shaped tumor arising from follicular cells.
DOID:11983,"Prader-Willi syndrome is a rare genetic disorder caused by missing or non-working genes on chromosome 15. It is characterized by severe hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and slow growth in infants. Other symptoms include short stature, hypogonadism, developmental delays, cognitive impairment, and distinctive behavioral characteristics like temper tantrums and obsessive-compulsive tendencies. Individuals with PWS often experience hyperphagia, leading to obesity and type 2 diabetes. They may have mild to moderate intellectual impairment, behavioral problems, and distinctive facial features. Hypogonadism is common, resulting in underdeveloped genitals and infertility. Treatment involves growth hormone therapy, dietary supervision, and specialized care throughout life"
DOID:10283,"Prostate cancer is a malignant tumor of the prostate that can be asymptomatic or cause various symptoms. It can be familial, with genetic predisposition playing a role in some cases. Diagnosis involves screening tests like PSA levels and biopsies, with Gleason scores determining tumor aggressiveness. Prostate cancer can grow slowly or rapidly, with symptoms including urinary issues and pain. Metastasis can occur, spreading cancer cells to other parts of the body. Treatment success varies, with some cases being life-threatening. Lifestyle factors and genetics can influence the risk of developing prostate cancer. Black individuals are at higher risk compared to white and Asian individuals. Early detection through screening is crucial for effective management. A male reproductive organ cancer that is located in the prostate."
DOID:10286,"Prostate cancer is a malignant tumor of the prostate that can be asymptomatic or cause various symptoms. It can be familial, with genetic predisposition playing a role in some cases. Diagnosis involves screening tests like PSA levels and biopsies, with Gleason scores determining tumor aggressiveness. Prostate cancer can grow slowly or rapidly, with symptoms including urinary issues and pain. Metastasis can occur, spreading cancer cells to other parts of the body. Treatment success varies, with some cases being life-threatening. Lifestyle factors and genetics can influence the risk of developing prostate cancer. Black individuals are at higher risk compared to white and Asian individuals. Early detection through screening is crucial for effective management. A prostate cancer that has material basis in abnormally proliferating cells derives from epithelial cells."
DOID:9008,"Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory arthritis associated with psoriasis, characterized by joint pain, stiffness, and swelling. It can range from mild to severe, affecting different joints asymmetrically or symmetrically. Nail changes and dactylitis are common features. The condition may involve spondylitis, leading to back and neck pain. Arthritis mutilans is a severe, rare form causing joint deformation. Psoriatic arthritis is diagnosed through physical exams and imaging tests, with treatments focusing on controlling inflammation and pain. It is associated with an autoimmune basis and has a strong genetic component."
DOID:7148,"Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory autoimmune disease primarily affecting joints, characterized by pain, swelling, and stiffness. It commonly involves small joints in the hands and feet, progressing to larger joints. Symptoms typically appear in mid- to late adulthood, with flares and remissions. The disease can also affect other tissues and organs, causing fatigue, weight loss, and anemia. Rheumatoid arthritis can lead to joint deformity and disability if left untreated. Treatments include medication, lifestyle changes, and surgery to manage pain and reduce joint damage. The exact cause of rheumatoid arthritis is unknown, but factors like genes, environment, and hormones may contribute."
DOID:1115,"Sarcoma is a malignant tumor that originates from mesenchymal cells, which are part of connective tissue. This type of cancer can arise from various types of connective tissues, leading to different subtypes of sarcoma based on the tissue and cell type of origin. Sarcoma is characterized by abnormally proliferating cells that come from embryonic mesoderm."
DOID:9074,"Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by the production of autoantibodies against various molecules, leading to inflammation and organ damage. Symptoms include joint pain, skin rashes, fatigue, and kidney problems. SLE can affect multiple organs, such as the skin, joints, kidneys, heart, and nervous system. It is marked by periods of exacerbation and remission, with potential life-threatening complications over time. Lupus is an autoimmune disease that causes inflammation throughout the body, with symptoms varying in severity. Early diagnosis and treatment by a rheumatologist are crucial."
DOID:399,"Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is a contagious disease that primarily affects the lungs but can also target other body parts like the kidneys, spine, and brain. Most infections are asymptomatic, known as latent TB, but can progress to active disease in about 10% of cases. Symptoms of active TB include chronic cough with blood-containing mucus, fever, night sweats, and weight loss. TB is transmitted through droplets released when an infected person coughs or sneezes. If left untreated, TB disease can be fatal, but it can be cured with antibiotics."
DOID:13223,"Uterine leiomyoma, also known as fibroids, are benign tumors of the uterine myometrium, prevalent in women of reproductive age. Symptoms may include heavy periods, infertility, pelvic pain, and complications during pregnancy. Fibroids are the leading cause of hysterectomy in the US. They are muscle cell and tissue growths in the uterus, with unknown causes. Risk factors include being African American or overweight. Symptoms can include heavy bleeding, frequent urination, pain during sex, and lower back pain. Treatment options include drugs to slow growth or surgery, but many women with fibroids may not require treatment. Fibroids can impact fertility, but infertility treatments are available."
DOID:11165,"Common wart is a viral infectious disease caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) types 1, 2, 4, 27, and 57. It results in raised warts with a rough surface, commonly found on hands but can grow anywhere on the body. These warts are papillomatous, keratinous growths that can affect any part of the skin and adjacent mucous epithelia, and are prevalent during childhood and adolescence."
DOID:2366,"West Nile virus (WNV) is a neurotropic, single-stranded RNA flavivirus transmitted by mosquitoes. It was first isolated in 1937 and emerged in Europe and New York in 1999, spreading throughout North America. WNV causes a range of diseases from fever to lethal encephalitis, with increased susceptibility in the elderly and immunocompromised. The virus is part of the Flaviviridae family and primarily affects birds, maintaining a transmission cycle between birds and mosquitoes. Humans and horses can exhibit symptoms, including fever, headache, body aches, and skin rash. Severe cases can lead to life-threatening brain inflammation. Prevention involves avoiding mosquito bites through repellent use, eliminating breeding sites, and staying indoors during peak mosquito activity."
